



Tracking Exposed
shared blog about https://tracking.exposed initiatives and updates
Jul 1
https://american.muslims.tracking.exposed
Amnesty International released a report in February few weeks after the Muslim Ban. I want to go a little more technical to show how the current Internet business model can easily lead to religious profiling.
From the report, keep in mind the key points:
A big market of users profiles exists, even with ethnicity based segmentation
The tech industry has voiced criticism of Trump’s travel ban. In the first week of February, 97 companies , joined forces by filing an amicus in support of a lawsuit against Trump’s immigration orders
Nearly 3,000 tech professionals have also signed a pledge to?—?among other things?—?refuse to cooperate in building discriminatory databases, remember this promise:
We are choosing to stand in solidarity with Muslim Americans, immigrants, and all people whose lives and livelihoods are threatened by the incoming administration’s proposed data collection policies. We refuse to build a database of people based on their Constitutionally-protected religious beliefs. We refuse to facilitate mass deportations of people the government believes to be undesirable.
Our question is: “how the modern online ecosystem can be used to create religion-based registries?”


spoiler: with the collaboration of the advertising firms above
? Someone collects apparently harmless data
Every website has trackers, many trackers, for different reasons. All of them have some reasons to have those ( ignorance can be, often is financial or technical), Princeton University is running a test keeping track of the phenomena: https://webtransparency.cs.princeton.edu/webcensus/
Trackers keep profiles; it is their business. When companies provides a third party service (and a website for some reasons enables it), it is because they want to link user to the content visited, using technical identifiers hidden in the device.
If your website is for example selling loans, what the tracker’s records is “user X-12425, on 1st of July 2017, is looking for a loan”.
Frequency defines who you are
Pick a content. A user access once? Happen, twice? happen. Trice? You look for it. More? You like it. Five days per week? You have to be down on the subject. More than 40 weeks per year? Hey, User, you live for it.
? A rich grey market to sell and remix


Derivate from http://www.lumapartners.com/resource-center/
These are companies involved in the data business. We can find confirmation of their presence analyzing trackers in the mobile apps or looking at the websites who relay on them. The companies we can verify are the one display in color, on the right. On the left (the grey market) you can see the companies which buy, enrich, analyze, and resell personal or group profiles, they offer business to business services.
And that’s the market of the data brokers. A market fast and dynamic, where databases changes ownership and resell data while companies bid on a user profiles. There is, in fact, an entire economy based on attention. Companies pay to appear on your device or run a tracking script on it. And as you can see, the grey area, companies we can’t see directly, it is bigger than the one we know. You get the metaphor, right, we can see only the tip of this iceberg:


https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Online_advertising
Do you remember the words reported from http://neveragain.tech/ ? I feel they are completely true. They condemn Muslim ban, they will not do any religious database. And if it is done, I believe Some courageous person will blow the whistle to some media, or report it to the police. It is illegal, but even more, it is unethical to do such segmentation in the society. Had it been done in the past, such grave crimes shall not be repeated.


https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/feb/18/historybooks.features
? can be a registry in the 2017 an oppression tool? Nope: it’s just an algorithm
In a tracking company, they aren’t doing anything wrong. The daily goal is to “appear as much a possible in the user’s browser,” to study where they are navigating and thus to attribute some interests to them. This is for instance what could be collected:


The log is an apparently valueless set of records with limited privacy and ethical implication
It is harmless isn’t? But, among the many services display above in the grey area, you can even buy webpages content analysis. For example, something that makes you classify websites. Their assets are associations like this:


And now? Just pick your non private sensitive logs, buy an access on the service above, and run an algorithm like this:


An example of an algorithm full of political meanings.
The aforementioned algorithm it is far less accountable than a database; it decides based on parameters who is a Muslim and who it is not. It could looks accurate, but can’t be 100% right: religious it is pretty intimate. Still, an algorithm do not accept appeal, also if you are not Muslim.
The one above is just an example among many: similar attacks can be done using GPS coordinate obtain from mobile app with access to the location data. The data sources are many, and if such database can’t exist, but algorithms with political meanings can be run by many of the companies described above.
Considering the complexity of such market, we can just aim for reducing as much a possible all the third party trackers, polluting their activity when it is possible, and disincentivizing their business.
? a matter of corporate responsibility
Is the website responsible for their users? Maybe. It is a matter of corporate responsibility and a standard answer do not exist.
The users adopted some solutions in the past such as installing ad-blocker. It is the basic self defense techniques, but it is a way viable only for those who know about this technology. It is not the political settlement I want.
Law and policies? They are slow, easy to be infiltrated by lobbyists, and despite all the weird policies we saw that:
we can’t live on an Internet without trackers
Advertising and user profiling it is the primary business model online. (and when someone tried to change it with more than words: get sued)
A company producing content has, among its corporate responsibilities, the one of making benefits and sustaining the business. Changing that business model could be a long term goal, but this project addresses an urgent condition and offers a viable solution.
We isolated four groups of websites which their usage can profile the users as Muslim. None of these categories (I’m making a bit of generalization here) produce content because their business model is different. Ideally, they have no reason to use third party trackers.
For all, there is a list and some basic visualizations intended to make the phenomena of the web surveillance more concrete. The website owner has not been reaching out. They are just a small sample of all the sites intended for a Muslim target audience. Second, not all the web admins or the companies behind those website are aware of the third party trackers problem (you can help, specially if you know them)
Halal food (list, visualization)
Travel agency for Hajj (list, visualization)
Mosques (list, visualization)
Islamic Culture (list, visualization)


If you can do your own data analysis, there is the API description here: https://american.muslims.tracking.exposed/know-more
They have trackers, they are intended for a sensible audience, and they can, maybe, remove their trackers from their pages.
? Next steps?
The website contains more details and links, all the actors in the chain can do something, but specially: this is a collaborative analysis, researcher and analyst can reuse the data, debate about the potential data abuses and going toward a cleaner web ecosystem is the goal of tracking-exposed initiative. The analysis can be extended in new categories, feel free to proposes your changes at the github repository.
Thanks to
Rahma Sghaier, Andrea Raimondi, IACAP meeting 2017; written by Claudio Agosti
Some rights reserved 
AdvertisingSurveillanceReligious FreedomMuslim BanAlgorithms





Tracking Exposed
shared blog about https://tracking.exposed initiatives and updates

More from Tracking Exposed
Facebook algorithm and impact on media: French election experiment #1

Tracking Exposed

8



Also tagged Religious Freedom
Congressional Republicans optimistic about anti-LGBT legislation in new term

Zack Ford

32



Also tagged Muslim Ban
This week in Trump’s America: Week 2

Zack Ford

21


Responses

Be the first to write a response…
Tracking Exposed





